once around triangulum.
So, Triangulum, the galaxy
is marked on the map here. The little
red ellipse M33
just north of the little triangle that
is the triangulum constellation itself
and just below the line of the main part
of the constellation of Andromeda there
with of course the Andromeda galaxy, the
larger red ellipse at the top. And
sometimes this is called the pinwheel
galaxy. Although it more often called
the triangulum galaxy these days because
the
M101 galaxy in Ursa Major is also called
the pinwheel galaxy. Um and so that was
causing quite a lot of confusion.
Was first observed back in the day back
with Charles Messier's catalog of 1774.
It was put down as object number 33. Uh
again, his list of things that were
annoyingly not comets because he was
really a comet hunter and people kept
sending in reports of fuzzy objects in
the sky and he had to have a quick way
of ruling them out. Now you you can and
I have seen this galaxy with the unaded
eye. It's slightly further away than the
Andromeda galaxy. It's often said that
the unaded eye can see as far as
Andromeda at 2 1/2 million light years
and that's the most distant object you
can see. But I had the pleasure of being
the onboard astronomer on board the
Queen Mary 2 for Cunard a couple of
years ago in the Caribbean on the most
barmy beautiful night with superbly dark
environment between the islands with the
ship's lights off giving a guided tour
of the night sky and I could see
Triangulum with the naked eye. So that
was absolutely fantastic. with
binoculars. It's relatively
straightforward to uh track it down and
it's well worth having a look.
It's a spiral galaxy. We've got this
marvelous picture of it on the right
hand side here, but smaller than the
Milky Way. 40 billion stars, so around
about 10% of the number that we have in
our own galaxy. And that makes it the
second smallest spiral galaxy in the
local group of galaxies. So the biggest
is Andromeda, then the Milky Way, then
you have triangulum and then smaller
than that we have the large melenic
cloud which is also classed as a spiral
galaxy these days. Although it was in my
original astronomy textbooks it was
recorded as an irregular. So I think
we've learned more about that since
then.
So, 61,000 lighty years in diameter.
It's fairly large. Um, but not very
massive. And if you look at it, you can
see that it has this somewhat fluffy
appearance to it. We get to see it at a
almost face on angle, 54°. So, we do get
to have quite a good view, better than
we do for Andromeda, where it's a little
bit more tilted towards the edge on
orientation.
It's been studied in many many ways and
in particular we know there is around
about six billion solar masses worth of
stars and about 3.2 billion solar masses
worth of gas in the galaxy.
But its rotation rate has been studied
using the Doppler shift. You can see
that in the top image with the blue
colored area being the part coming
towards you and the red where it's
moving away from you and the middle
regions where it's crossing the line of
sight. And
we have at the bottom a plot of the
rotation rate
based on the amount of
material we can see the lit material.
we would get that dotted line for the
rotation rate. That's using Kepler's
laws and Newton's laws of gravity.
Whereas what we see is the much higher
and longer trailing out rising curve of
the starlight and the 21 cm hydrogen
radio observations. And that's telling
us that there is a lot much larger halo
of dark matter totaling around 50
billion solar masses worth in which the
visible matter is just the central blob.
The spiral arms as I said fantastic
photograph this. We can see all those
dark dust lanes and you can see how the
spiral arms are somewhat indistinct and
fuzzy here. This actually goes to show
really that the the galaxy is fairly
diffuse. Um, as you would expect, it's
2/3 the diameter of the Milky Way, but
contains onetenth the number of stars.
And those stars, we have old ones
dominating in the center and more recent
uh creations in the spiral arms around
the outside. and the more recent star
formation regions. There's some active
star formation regions that are marked
in pink, but the blue coloration to the
outside is because that the star
formation process has created quite a
lot of giant stars as is normal. And
those giant stars are very very luminous
and very hot and very blue in color. And
so where you have present hot young
stars, you see blue light, but only
until they die out. And once they are
gone, you see the color as is in the
center of the longived older stars. And
so the nucleus has not formed very many
stars recently. And therefore, it hasn't
got any surviving giant stars. And we
have that much yellowower white color.
And so fantastic image. This one's an
infrared image taken by the Spitzer
Space Telescope which picks out the real
structure of the gas that is uh in
filaments radiating around. They're sort
of underpinning that star formation
process. The emission from hydrogen
light where new stars are being formed.
So, a very interesting structure, almost
like a spid's web, isn't it? But right
in the center, we have a star cluster
called NGC 604. And you can see there
has been a burst of star formation here.
Quite a lot of white and blue white
stars. And therefore, this is fairly
young, around about 3 million years.
Otherwise, they would have died, leaving
us only with the older longived
population. And you can still see the
cocoon of material being blown out in a
giant bubble where the radiation from
those hot stars is blowing it away. Um
so it's a whole series of images of
this. This is another one here um
northeast of the central core of the
galaxy about 1,500 light years in
diameter. You can see that central core
of stars and the wispy gas all around it
with that uh cocoon bubble in the
center. And the James Web Space
Telescopes got in on the act recently as
well and produced these two marvelous
images just to show that in even more
detail. So that's NGC 604, the very
prominent cluster just north of the
central region.
But there's something peculiar about
Triangulum. It has no bulge.
At the top left, we've got an image
which is in fact the Andromeda galaxy.
And you can see the blue color of the
star formation regions in the spiral
arms, the hot young stars again, the
dust lanes, the yellow color of the
central region, and you can see the
spherical bulge sticking out of the
center there um in sort of 3D spheroid
rather than a flat disc. But with
triangulum, we just don't see a bulge.
We we see a disc, but no bulging
nucleus. There are there's the color and
there is the the central region but it
just isn't bulging out in the same way.
Very interesting indeed and with
consequences which we shall see. Now
surrounding triangulum galaxy we have
globular clusters. Uh these seem to be a
feature surrounding all such galaxies
and we've identified at least 54 and
probably over 100. I think 122 was the
last count. And they are potentially
still in the process of forming. Uh
possibly due to that gas
streaming inwards from the outer halo in
towards the center creating that
filamentary structure that we saw in the
infrared Spitzer image.
The top right hand image here is an
ultraviolet image and it shows a lot of
massive stars in those star forming
regions. This is showing how the massive
stars with with their very high
temperatures are putting out a lot of
their light in the ultraviolet part of
the spectrum. And right in the center of
the galaxy, there is an ultral luminous
X-ray source. And that is suggestive of
what we might reasonably expect, a black
hole with an accretion disc pulling
material in, spinning it up, and the
friction raising its temperature to
hundreds of thousands, if not millions
of degrees, and creating very high
energy X-rays in the process.
So the question is, do we have a central
black hole? Well, the speed of the stars
moving around the nucleus seem to
suggest that there should be, but we
just can't find it. The image on the
right is not the black hole in the
center of Triangulum. It's the one in
the center of our own galaxy.
And
this has put a limit on the mass of a
black hole in triangulum of 1,500 solar
masses. So that the one in the middle of
an our galaxy is 4 million. And if you
were to scale that down perhaps by a
factor of 10 to the scale of triangulum,
you would get 400,000.
And we don't. It's got to be less than
1500. So could be trying to tell us that
the lack of a super massive black hole
goes with the lack of a bulge. And it's
possible that super massive black holes
are only associated with galaxies that
have bulges rather than simple disc
galaxies. And so perhaps there's a
connection. And perhaps all that we have
here is not a super massive black hole
but an intermediate mass black hole of
perhaps a thousand to,500 solar masses
creating that X-ray source in the
center.
Now Triangulum is part of the local
group of galaxies in terms of distance.
We have the Milky Way and Andromeda at
about 2.5
million light years apart and triangulum
there slightly at a different angle and
slightly further away than Andromeda.
And perhaps
it's actually a satellite galaxy.
Perhaps it's in orbit around the
Andromeda galaxy. And in 2004,
detections were made of
clumpy hydrogen gas forming what you
might call a link or a bridge between
the two, suggesting that indeed these
have interacted with each other in the
past. So maybe there's been a a near
miss of triangulum with Andromeda at
some point uh in the not tooistant past.
And that might explain why the plane of
the disc of an uh the triangulum galaxy
is warped going out some way from the
center. It says 8 kPC here. That's 8
kilo parex. Um and a parseek is 3.26
light years. So if you multiply 8 by
3.26 you get what? 40 something like
that. Oh, anyway, it's uh the point here
really is that the disc of the galaxy is
warped and that suggests a gravitational
interaction.
And so looking into the future, what we
think is probably going to happen is
that the um complex dance of these
galaxies, Andromeda is coming towards
the Milky Way. We know that. We can tell
it from the uh blue shifting of the
light. It's coming in our direction, but
not on a direct course. This is a recent
finding that actually it's not coming
straight at us. It's going to miss very
slightly. And so the Milky Way and
Andromeda falling towards each other are
going to overshoot slightly, interact,
and then go for a second pass from much
closer in and probably merge at that
point. Meanwhile,
under gravity, the triangulum galaxy is
going to fall towards Andromeda. And as
Andromeda falls towards the Milky Way,
the path of triangulum will get bent
round into that green path and miss both
of them on this occasion, but eventually
it will come in and merge to form one
giant ensembler of all three together.
And there's evidence that some merger
activity has been going on in Andromeda.
This is taken from a paper published in
Nature. And we can see the uh negative
image here of um the black is the bright
parts of the galaxy. Um, so the image
has been inverted and we can see that
around it there are some streams of
material possibly indicating that a
number of small dwarf galaxies have been
uh consumed in the process of building
the larger uh triangulum galaxy
in between in the gap between the Milky
Way and Triangulum.
And indeed between all three of the
major galaxies we have some more members
of the local group. LGS3 the Pisces
dwarf is one of the smaller members of
our association. It's only a thousand
light years across and 26 million times
the mass of the sun. So over a thousand
times less massive than the um uh
triangulum galaxy even
2 million lightyears from Milky Way,
less than 1 million from both Andromeda
and Triangulum. And so again this could
be in orbit around Triangulum. It could
be in orbit around Andromeda or perhaps
the center of mass of the system. And
time will tell. We hope to be able to
work out what's going on with this one
in the future.
But another factor that shows the
complex behavior that's observed within
the triangulum galaxy relates to the
chemistry that we see.
The chemical composition of the galaxy
revealed in the infrared spectrum of the
different regions shows that the inner
disc
perhaps half the uh portion of the
galaxy out to about 30,000 light years
shows the classic decreasing
elemental composition. So
it's dirtiest in the center and cleanest
to the edge.
The proportion of heavy elements
gradually declines in a manner that is
very typical because there have been
more stars formed earlier and more giant
stars exploding as supernovi having made
more heavy elements in the central part
of the galaxy and then
uh gradually that's worked its way out
through the galaxy. The so-called inside
out theory of galaxy formation. The um
star formation begins in the center and
works its way out and the uh giant stars
follow that trend polluting with the
heavy elements as they go and more fresh
gas is coming in from outside and that's
giving the outer layers of the galaxy a
much flatter profile. And so that all
seems to fit together with our ideas of
how galaxies are growing and morphing
and uh changing their chemical
composition. And so I will leave you
with just these images of M33, the
triangulum galaxy itself, NGC 604,
one of its globular clusters, a
background galaxy that happens to be in
the line of sight, and one of the
foreground stars that uh just happens to
be in our line of sight. Uh you can see
those picked out in the insetss on the
main image there. So, thanks very much
for listening and I'll leave you with
that lovely image of the star forming
regions of the triangulum galaxy. Thanks
very much.